---
title: The Importance of a Wandering Mind
date: 2019-02-04
---

After reading [Deep Work](https://www.amazon.ca/dp/1455586692/ref=cm_sw_em_r_mt_dp_U_lifwCb3D91JXH) from Call Newport I became extremely conscious of my focusing habits. This is because, according to him, our environment has become saturated with distractions. As a consequence, our ability to focus deeply on important or challenging tasks is suffering. The problem is that the tasks that truly makes us grow or allow to push boundaries forward require this kind of work. You won't learn the piano or find solution to today's complex challenges if you can't sit and work in a deeply focused state. The good news is that by changing our habits we can train our brain to stay in a state of deep focus very much like training a muscle. Although I entirely agree with Call Newport's view of the situation, I think it is biased.

It is only when I started reading [Focus](https://www.amazon.ca/Focus-Hidden-Excellence-Daniel-Goleman/dp/0062114964) by Daniel Goleman that I realized how simplified Newport's view of the brain's attention mechanism was and how the solution to the deep focus scarcity is much more subtle than simply cutting down on distraction time and aiming at staying in a deep focus state for as many hours per day as possible. Indeed, without going into all the details, Goleman explains how our mind follows two main pattern of attention, bottom-up and top-down. Bottom-up is when we are in automatic mode, when the mind wanders and when we let our emotions and immediate senses drive our train of thoughts. Top-down is when we make the conscious decision to focus on something. It is the birth place of  self-control and directed focus, what Newport calls deep work. However, not only is that top-down state tiring but the bottom-up state is extremely important: it allows creative thinking, learning deeply by pondering new ideas and features problem solving capabilities much beyond those of the conscious mind. In other words, even when we are not consciously focused on a task, the mind unconsciously works hard. This is why we not only need to cultivate our deep working habits but we also need to allow room for the mind to digest information, create new links and be creative, ultimately leading to the real insights that can propel us or an important project forward. 

The only caveat is that if we let the mind wander, in our modern environment filled with distractions, it will simply be just that, distracted. Television, emails and video games do not allow the mind to rest and wander. This is why Goleman suggests being in a state of mindfulness throughout the day where you just let things flow by without letting yourself be carried away by emotions and also avoiding to focus deeply on any tasks. This allows our mind to be fresh and rested when we do decide to focus deeply but also to purposefully let it wander when we decide to so that the wandering mind is truly fructuous.